Renovating GHC's extensions mechanism (#628)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: manifestoes/extensions.rst

.. sectnum::
.. contents::

.. _PR: https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/628

> **GHC Language Configuration Renovation**

Reviewer: This doesn't match the usual header? In particular the rendered version doesn't link back to the PR discussion at the top.

Author: It's not a usual proposal! It's a manifesto. :)

But I agree a direct link back to the PR would be helpful.

think about the problems at hand. It is thus reasonable to expect people to differ
on these points, as with any value judgments. My point here is simply calling
something an "error" or a "warning" or some other problem is not very informative.
Accordingly, we should strive for a *uniform treatment* of these potential problems;
doing so would simplify Haskell's user interface.

Let's also reflect on why we have warnings at all. I claim the usefulness of
warnings depends on what our user is trying to accomplish. Here are some
possibilities:

1. The user is actively developing the code in question.
2. The user is compiling the code in question in order to use the compilation
   output (as a library or an application); the user is not a developer of the
   code.
3. The user is running CI and/or publishing their work.

In scenario (1), warnings are great. They give the user information they might
use to improve their code. Indeed warnings are better than errors for them, because
perhaps their focus at the moment is on a different part of the code than where
the warning arose, or perhaps the user is experimenting and is happy for e.g. an

> import to be unused.

Reviewer 2: Why is it a problem for these to be errors? One reason is that errors _stop compilation_, so you can't on with working elsewhere while there is an error around. But we can improve that situation! I will shortly be making a HF proposal about that: https://discourse.haskell.org/t/pre-hftp-fault-tolerant-ghc-compiler-pipeline/8445?u=michaelpj

If errors don't stop compilation then the distinction between warnings and errors is much less significant, it mostly just affects the colour of the text (perhaps you need a new category of FATAL errors that do in fact stop compilation).

Author: I see the work here very much as in sympathy with the fault-tolerance you describe. Already GHC has a bit of fluidity between errors are warnings (though the mechanisms are manifold and confusing, having grown organically). My stance here is essentially that warnings really are errors -- just ones that GHC already knows how to recover from. But I don't want such errors published. :)

In scenario (2), warnings are mostly useless. The user doesn't care about the
code being compiled, and doesn't need to know that it has a few unused variables.
The only reason that warnings aren't completely useless here is that conscientious
users might reach out to library authors to tell them that their code is warning.

> In scenario (3), warnings are actively harmful. When going through final checks

Reviewer 2: I found this sentence confusing - the previous paragraphs are talking about how good the warning _mechanism_ is, here I think you're talking about the presence of warnings. I think it would be more consistent to say
```suggestion
In scenario (3), warnings are critical. When going through final checks
```

Author: Interesting! I was intending a different emphasis here than came across. I will revise.

before merging a pull request or posting on Hackage, an unresolved warning is a
potential problem in code that the programmer might have missed. This might be
disastrous.

Happily, we can accommodate all of these usage scenarios and treat warnings
appropriately, as detailed in a proposal below. The key points can be summarized
in two sentences:

> * **Preparing a package for uploading to Hackage (e.g. ``cabal sdist``) should

Reviewer 2: Just to hammer it home (I think it's implicit but not quite stated), for this to be the case we really need it to be the case that different versions of GHC produce the same warnings when compiling the same code (given the language edition). Otherwise this is quite under-defined - or are we just saying that the user should fix the warnings for the version of GHC that they are currently using?

Even with that, it seems that your Latest edition would give unpredictable warnings. So if the goal is for packages on Hackage to be warning-free then I think we would also need to say that they cannot have the Latest edition?

Author: That's a good point. I don't actually think I want to insist that different versions of GHC produce exactly the same warnings -- that's nice, but probably too expensive to promise. Variability here might be annoying to users. They can always disable the warning, or disable the `-Werror` behavior. (I don't want to force anyone into anything with this! Just encourage. Not force.) Maybe it would be worth taking a pass through the specific warnings enabled to evaluate them for expected stability.

To clarify my stance here, my goal isn't so much that all packages on Hackage are warning free in a given version of GHC. Instead it's to say that authors of all packages on Hackage have considered the coding problems that are warned about. Authors can suppress the warnings. But they should have to take some action around warn-worthy situations to be able to publish. That's not a very tight specification! But I think it's still worthwhile.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't we need some way of locally suppressing particular warnings for this idea to become practical?

Author: Yes, that would be nice. But I still think this aspect of the proposal would be useful even without this mechanism.

  in the next edition in a given series. So the ``Stable2024`` edition of
  ``-Wcompat`` will warn about features changing in ``Stable2027``. This
  set of warnings will likely grow between 2024 and 2027; that's fine.
  (We do *not* guarantee that all ``Stable`` code remain warning-free, especially
  with ``-Wcompat`` enabled.) Now if a user is running ``Stable2024`` in
  2028 with ``-Wcompat``, they won't see warnings about changes due in
  2030; they'll see just the warnings they need to upgrade to ``Stable2027``.

* **Simplicity**. The goal is that a vast majority of our users will be
  able to specify a language edition, and that's it. No extensions. No
  warning flags. This simplifies what a user needs to think about when
  setting up a Haskell project, removing the paralysis of choice that
  can reign today.

Proposed specification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  We refresh the concept of *language
   edition*. Existing language editions ``Haskell98``, ``Haskell2010``, and
   ``GHC2021`` will continue to be language editions, to which we
   add the following:

   * ``Stable2024``
   * ``Experimental2024``
   * ``Latest``

>    * ``Student2024``

Reviewer 2: This seems like a lot. One of the costs of making language editions into powerful things instead of collections of defaults is that the overhead tends to grow over time. It seems like it would be easier going forwards if we instead built these out of some component flags. For example, we could have:
```
--stable-from=2024
```
Which can be used uniformly to control what stability date you want - then `Stable2024` just provides a default value for that.

Similarly, if we provide `--error-message-abstraction=basic`, then `Student2024` can just be `--stable-from=2024 --error-message-abstraction=basic`.

Author: I'm not sure I see the payload of this suggestion. We could break these into components, as you suggest. But how would that reduce complexity / overhead?

  together similar features. The individual choices are detailed below.
  When using one of the new language
  editions, error messages suggest opting into one of these bundles,
  rather than suggesting individual extensions.

- When printing out the namne of a warning flag as part of a warning,
  we also include any bundle that also controls the warning.

Detailed specification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The chart below classifies all current extensions and warnings.

* The GHC2021 column has an X for extensions enabled as part of GHC2021.
  For warnings, it lists if the warning is part of a current warning bucket.

* The next four columns describe ``Student2024``, ``Stable2024``, ``Experimental2024``, and ``Latest``,
  respectively. Here is the key for these columns:

  * Y: an extension is turned on

  * blank: the feature is available, but not on

  * N: trying to enable the feature is an error

  * W: the warning warns by default

  * E: the warning is an error by default

  * W!: the warning warns by default and cannot be turned off

  * E!: the warning is an error by default and cannot be turned off or made into a warning

> * The next several columns describe semantic bundles of options.

Reviewer 2: I'm on the fence about these. My instinct is to say that I want to say something more like "FancyTypes but without the dubious stuff (for some personal definition of dubious)". But in practice I agree with the statement elsewhere that other languages tend to not give people this level of fine-grained control and it's fine: you just don't use the stuff you don't like.

Author: As a Haskeller, I would prefer the fine-grained control. I'll happily declare which features I want and use just those. I like tight specifications.

But I actively want Haskell to be easier to use by people unlike me. "Is that an existential type? or a rank-n type? Both have foralls in weird places..... Oh, forget it, I'll just do without."

The big counterpoint here is that an enterprise might want to choose just certain fancy types. But they still can, if they want to. Or at least as much as our extension system allows: one might reasonably be happy for datatypes to introduce new equalities but not want proper existentials, yet there's no way to say this.

    redundant. Users enabling this option take responsibility for monitoring their own code for unused
    variables and other constructs.

    Includes the following: ``-Wno-unused-do-bind``, ``-Wno-unused-foralls``, ``-Wno-unused-imports``,
    ``-Wno-unused-local-binds``, ``-Wno-unused-matches``, ``-Wno-unused-packages``, ``-Wno-unused-pattern-binds``,
    ``-Wno-unused-record-wildcards``, ``-Wno-unused-top-binds``, ``-Wno-unused-type-patterns``

  * ``Explicit``: This option causes GHC to warn when it makes an assumption. To get code to compile
    with ``Explicit``, users must rely less on inference and more on their own annotations. Users specifying
    ``Explicit`` take on the responsibility of writing and maintaining these extra annotations.

    Includes the following: ``-Wmissing-deriving-strategies``, ``-Wmissing-exported-pattern-synonym-signatures``,
    ``-Wmissing-exported-signatures``, ``-Wmissing-export-lists``, ``-Wmissing-import-lists``,
    ``-Wmissing-kind-signatures``, ``-Wmissing-local-signatures``, ``-Wmissing-pattern-synonym-signatures``,
    ``-Wmissing-role-annotations``, ``-Wmissing-signatures``

>   * ``Complete``: There are a number of places where programmers can omit parts of their program

Reviewer 2: YES

      does so (unless the expressions in the program indeed loop).

      Includes the following: ``FlexibleContexts``, ``FlexibleInstances``, ``LiberalTypeSynonyms``,
      ``MultiParamTypeClasses``, ``TypeSynonymInstances``, ``UndecidableInstances``, ``UndecidableSuperClasses``

    * ``T2``:  It is possible (though unlikely) that type inference
      will change between major releases. This level enables *functional dependencies*, which
      allows type inference to propagate information in new, sometimes unexpected ways.

      Includes the following: ``FunctionalDependencies``, ``ImpredicativeTypes`` (Quick Look only),
      ``NoMonoLocalBinds``, ``OVERLAP`` pragmas, ``TypeFamilyDependencies``

    * ``T3``: The type inference engine is now allowed, in some scenarios, to make guesses
      between two valid possibilities. These guesses might even influence runtime behavior.
      Enabling this level of type inference should be done only by users who are confident
      in writing confluent sets of class instances.

      Includes the following: ``DeepSubsumption``, ``IncoherentInstances`` (but without implying

>       ``INCOHERENT`` on every instance), ``NoMonomorphismRestriction``, ``-Wno-warn-orphans``

Reviewer: Maybe this is too much detail for now, but it isn't obvious what "`IncoherentInstances` (but without implying `INCOHERENT` on every instance)" means. Perhaps that writing `INCOHERENT` pragmas at all is guarded by `T3`? And the rest of the choices for this group seem strange to me.

>   Here is the for these columns:

Reviewer: I was reading quickly and didn't realise that "these columns" refers only to some columns...

```suggestion
  Here is the key for the "semantic bundle" columns:
```

  This is a real problem. It is mitigated a bit by the existence of ``Latest``,
  which will evolve with every GHC release (possibly even minor releases). To
  me, we're striking the right balance between due caution and our desire for
  evolution, but individual experiences and opinions will differ.

Proposal: Make warnings into errors for deployment
--------------------------------------------------

According to the analysis above, having warnings not stop compilation
is most useful during interactive development. Since a warning indicates
a problem of some sort in your code, though, it should stop deployment.

Thus, I propose:

* ``cabal sdist`` fails if any warnings are produced during compilation.

* Tools that perform Haskell CI (such as `haskell-ci <https://github.com/haskell-CI/haskell-ci>`_)
  should turn warnings into errors.

These are not GHC proposals. But I think it may be useful to consider
the language editions proposed above with respect to the design here.
I am not an expert in cabal's or haskell-ci's UI, so I will not specify
the details here. However, I would expect all such tools to offer

> some way to opt out of the erroring behavior, just to allow e.g. an

Reviewer 2: There should always be escape hatches!

   and friends. The behavior of such functions is often important in
   Haskell programs. In thinking about stability, we should be attuned
   to possible changes here. If we identify any particular patterns of
   impure functions that we wish to guarantee future support for, we
   should document them.

.. [#]
   With any of the new language editions specified (that is, anything
   other than ``Haskell98``, ``Haskell2010``, or ``GHC2021``),
   ``ExistentialQuantification`` will allow only existential quantification,
   not also (and accidentally) GADTs.

.. [#]
   ``LexicalNegation`` fixes a wart in the language around unary ``-``, by
   requiring unary ``-`` not to have any whitespace after it. However, unary
   ``-`` remains the only symbolic unary function in the language. I hereby
   propose fixing the wart in the other direction, by just killing off unary
   ``-``. In the presence of ``NegativeLiterals``, we can still write ``-5``
   for negative 5. But if you want to negate ``x``, just ``negate x``.

   Thus with any of the new language editions, users cannot write a unary
   ``-``, unless ``Classic`` mode is on.

.. [#]

>    It is time for the ``Safe`` ecosystem to be dismantled. We should warn

Reviewer: I agree with this, but I was surprised to see this buried in a footnote! For a while I've felt that `Safe` is not really pulling its weight, but proposing to remove it seemed like it risked sparking too much controversy. I think this proposal provides a good opportunity to argue the case for removal as part of the broader shake-up.

Reviewer 3: > I've felt that Safe is not really pulling its weight, but proposing to remove it seemed like it risked sparking too much controversy

I understood the outcome of https://discourse.haskell.org/t/deprecating-safe-haskell-or-heavily-investing-in-it/5489 to be that `Safe` was considered due for removal by a motivated person. N.B. @simonpj's comment

> I think it would be plausible to lay it to rest

Author: In a fit of enthusiasm a few years ago, I almost removed Safe. What stayed my hand is that it's goals are worthy, and any replacement of Safe will have to have a similar community buy-in and trust network. So it seemed a shame to disrupt the existing trust network just to have to rebuild it. For whatever reason, I'm now more confident that a replacement isn't coming anytime soon and that it really is time to leave Safe behind.

use to improve their code. Indeed warnings are better than errors for them, because
perhaps their focus at the moment is on a different part of the code than where
the warning arose, or perhaps the user is experimenting and is happy for e.g. an
import to be unused.

In scenario (2), warnings are mostly useless. The user doesn't care about the
code being compiled, and doesn't need to know that it has a few unused variables.
The only reason that warnings aren't completely useless here is that conscientious
users might reach out to library authors to tell them that their code is warning.

In scenario (3), the fact that warnings do not stop compilation is actively harmful. When going through final checks
before merging a pull request or posting on Hackage, an unresolved warning is a
potential problem in code that the programmer might have missed. This might be
disastrous.

Happily, we can accommodate all of these usage scenarios and treat warnings
appropriately, as detailed in a proposal below. The key points can be summarized
in two sentences:

* **Preparing a package for uploading to Hackage (e.g. ``cabal sdist``) should

>   fail if any warnings are produced.**

Reviewer 4: I disagree for two very practical reasons:

1. Cabal can produce sdists very quickly and doesn't require anything else from the environment. Checking for Haskell warnings adds a dependency on GHC and possibly system packages, and makes the process potentially very slow.
2. It's impossible to enforce from the Hackage side.

Author: Reasonable objections. But these are surmountable, if we want to make this change: `cabal` could retain some information saying whether the last build was warning-free (or even which warnings were produced) and then check the information during `sdist`. This would not induce a dependency on GHC. And similarly it could upload the evidence if we wanted a Hackage check (although I don't think the Hackage check is necessary).

I'm not arguing here that all of this is a good idea -- just that these implementation matters need not slow us down from the general idea.
